
Projective Patches
==================

.. post:: Feb 02, 2022
   :tags:
   :category: Elliptic Tales

`Previously <../1643839516/>`_ we talked about projective coordinates :math:`(x : y : z)`. A short summary:

A projective point :math:`P = (x : y : z)` is said to be *homothetic* to :math:`P' = (x' : y' : z')` if there exists a :math:`\lambda` such that :math:`(\lambda x : \lambda y : \lambda z) = (x' : y' : z')`.

If two points are homothetic, they represent *the same point* in the projective plane.

The projective plane allows us to explore behaviors of curves at infinities, singularities in a "continuous" way.

Recall that we can homogenize a polynomial :math:`f(x,y)` by including a :math:`z^{k-j}` in each of its monomials, where :math:`k` is the degree of the :math:`f` and :math:`j` is the degree of the monomial we are modifying. If we call this new polynomial :math:`h(x,y,z)`, we can say that :math:`h` is the homogenization of polynomial :math:`f` in the projective plane.

This all sounds pretty arbitrary, but when we recall that :math:`z=1` **by definition** in the finite (usual :math:`x,y`) plane, we are unaffected by :math:`z` and nothing weird is going on. :math:`h(x,y,1) = f(x,y)`!

But, when :math:`z=0` the resulting equation will be a just a straight line. Sometimes :math:`x = 0`, sometimes :math:`y = 0`, the vertical and horizontal axes respectively. Sometimes the resulting equation will be :math:`a/b = 0`, which again, while seemingly nonsensical, if we observe such a homogenized curve's behavior as :math:`z` *approaches* zero, we can see that what's emerging is a line with slope :math:`a/b`.


Some examples will be illuminating.

.. list-table:: Let Us See
   :header-rows: 1

   * - :math:`f(x,y)`
     - :math:`h(x,y,z)`
     - :math:`\lim{z \to 0} h(x,y,z)`
     - Projective Coordinates
   * - :math:`x^2 - y`
     - :math:`x^2 - yz`
     - :math:`x^2`
     - :math:`(1 : 0 : 0)`
   * - :math:`yx^2 - 3`
     - :math:`yx^2 - 3z^3`
     - :math:`yx^2`
     - :math:`(0 : 1 : 0)`
   * - :math:`xy - x^2 + y + x + 1`
     - :math:`xy - x^2 + yz + xz + z^2`
     - :math:`xy - x^2`
     - :math:`(1 : 1 : 0)`

Respectively, these correspond to: vertical line, horizontal line, and the 45° :math:`x = y` line.

The middle equation :math:`yx^2` gave me some trouble. Plotting, as we did `before <../1643839516/>`_ we get a clear indication that this strange shape is tending to flatten out toward the :math:`x` axis:

.. scriptdoc:: python3 1644082574_files/xy^2-3.py
   :output_language: html

Showing this algebraically is not as straightforward, but consider that for any point :math:`x` we will require a yet smaller :math:`y` to equal whatever fixed infinitesimal value for :math:`3z^3` we can imagine.

Let's graph some coordinate patches. Recall that for any given point :math:`(x : y : z)` The coordinate patch (or "affine plane") for any two variables is the plane we get when we set the *other one* to :math:`1`. :math:`(x : y : 1)`, which we've already explored some, is the affine coordinate patch for :math:`x,y`. Let's look at the others for our troublesome homogenized equation :math:`h(x,y,z) = yx^2 - 3z^3 = 0`.

First take a look at the plot of the original.

.. math::
   h(x,y,1) = f(x,y) = yx^2 - 3 = 0

.. scriptdoc:: python3 1644082574_files/yx^2-3z^3.py z
   :output_language: html

If we set :math:`x=1` and let :math:`z` vary, we get the following plot.

.. math::
   h(1,y,z) = y - 3z^3 = 0
   
.. scriptdoc:: python3 1644082574_files/yx^2-3z^3.py x
   :output_language: html

With :math:`y=1`...

.. math::
   h(x,1,z) = x^2 - 3z^3 = 0

.. scriptdoc:: python3 1644082574_files/yx^2-3z^3.py y
   :output_language: html

Take a look at the 3D plot of this monstrosity `here <https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=yx%5E2+-+3z%5E3+%3D+0>`_

One can imagine "exploring" the behavior as you near the origin approaching from, e.g. :math:`z=1` towards :math:`z=0` to understand the behavior of :math:`f(x,y) = 0` either :math:`x/y` gets very small or big.
